= ccp

CCP is a Ruby library for Composite Command Programming
that helps you to split spaghetti codes into pieces.

=== Websites
* http://github.com/maiha/ccp

== What is a Composite Command Programming?

There are three principles.

1. SRP (Single responsibility principle)
2. Typed Variables (especially needed in Ruby)
3. Explicit Data Dependencies

As you know, Ruby is a handy and powerful programming language.
We can use variables without definitions and re-assign them even if type mismatch.
Although it is very comfortable while you are writing, it would be painful for others.

CCP is a framework composed with above principles and a few debugging utils
that gives you(as writer) a little restrictions and gives you(as reader) a readability.


== Example
=== usual ruby code

  class SomeOperation
    def execute
      # fetching data
      # calculating it
      # print results
    end
  end

Later, it would be a more complex and longer code like this.

  class SomeOperation
    def execute
      @data = fetch_data
      ...
      @result = calculate(@data)
      ...
      print_results(@result)
    end

    def fetching_data
      # accessing instance variables, and long code here
      ...

Let's imagine a situation that you need to replace above "fetch" code after several years.
It is too hard to see data dependencies especially about instance variables.

=== with CCP

  class SomeOperation
    include Ccp::Commands::Composite

    command FetchData
    command Calculate
    command PrintResult
  end

  class FetchData                                # 1. SRP 
    include Ccp::Commands::Core

    # {before,after} methods can be used like Design By Contract
    def after
      data.check(:fetched, {Symbol => [Float]})  # 2. Typed Variables
    end

    def execute
      # fetching data...
      data[:fetched] = ...                       # 3. Data Dependencies
    end
  end

  class Calculate
    ...


All sub commands like FetchData,Calculate,PrintResult are executed
in each scopes, and can share variables only via data object.

So you can easily refactor or replace FetchData unit
because there are no implicit instance variable dependencies
and futhermore all depencenies would be explicitly declared in "before","after" method.

=== execute

Just call a "execute" instance method.

  cmd = SomeOperation.new
  cmd.execute

=== invokers

Invokers::Base is a top level composite command.
It acts same as composite except some special options.
Those are profile, comment, logger.

  class SomeOperation < Ccp::Invokers::Base
    command FetchData   # same as composite
    command Calculate   # same as composite
    ...

    profile true        # default false
    comment false       # default true
    ...

This profile option prints benchmarks of commands.

  ruby -r some_operation -e 'SomeOperation.execute'
  [43.3%] 2.5834830 FetchData#execute
  [35.9%] 2.0710440 Calculate#execute
  ...


== Skip commands

"skip" prefixed data key names are reserved for command skipping feature.
When data[:skip_XXX] given, the XXX command won't be invoked.

  class Program
    include Ccp::Commands::Composite
    command Cmd1
    command Cmd2
  end

  # normal case
  Program.execute                       # => Both Cmd1 and Cmd2 will be called

  # with skip
  Program.execute(:skip_cmd1 => true)   # => Both Cmd2 will be called


== Fixtures

Let's imagine a following command that just read :a and write :x.

    class TSFC                  # TestSaveFixtureCmd
      include Ccp::Commands::Core

      def execute
        data[:a]                # read
        data[:x] = 10           # write
      end
    end

This may be a part of sequncial commands. 
When we want to test only this command, usually we should prepare
some fixture data for the 'data' object.

=== Generating fixtures

Ccp can automatically generate fixture data for each commands.
Pass :save_fixture option to 'execute' class method to enable it.

  * fixture_save : set true if you want this feature
  * fixture_dir  : set root dir of fixture (default: tmp/fixtures)
  * fixture_kvs  : file structure: :file|:dir (default: :file)
  * fixture_ext  : file format: :json|:yaml (default: :json)
  * fixture_keys : save data only keys written in here

In above example, we can kick it with data[:a] like this.

    TSFC.execute(:a => 1)

And if you want to geneate fixures for this command, just add :save_fixture.

    TSFC.execute(:a => 1, :fixture_save => true)

This will create following files.

  % tree tmp/fixtures
  tmp/fixtures
  +- tsfc
      +- stub.json
      +- mock.json

  1 directory, 2 files    
  % cat tmp/fixtures/tsfc/stub.json
  {"a":1}
  % cat tmp/fixtures/tsfc/mock.json
  {"x":10}

Where, reading means stub and writing means mock.

=== Writing tests

Use them as stubs and expected data as you like.

  describe TSFC do
    it "should work" do
      data     = JSON.load(Pathname("tmp/fixtures/tsfc/stub.json").read{})
      expected = JSON.load(Pathname("tmp/fixtures/tsfc/mock.json").read{})

      cmd = TSFC.execute(data)

      expected.each_pair do |key, val|
        cmd.data[key].should == val
      end
    end
  end

This code is highly versatile.

=== Filter commands

  * fixture_save : specify command names (negations can be used as "!")

For example, imagine composite commands like this.

  Program
    +- Cmd1
    +- Cmd2
    +- Cmd3

In this case, 

    Program.execute(:fixture_save => true)

generates following files.

  * tmp/fixtures/cmd1/*.json
  * tmp/fixtures/cmd2/*.json
  * tmp/fixtures/cmd3/*.json
  * tmp/fixtures/program/*.json

If you want fixture data only for cmd2, run this.

    Program.execute(:fixture_save => ["Cmd2"])

"!" is used for special syntax which means 'negations'.

    Program.execute(:fixture_save => ["!Program"])

will generates fixtures for cmd1,cmd2,cmd3 (in short "not program").

=== Filter data

  * fixture_keys : specify data key names (negations can be used as "!")

For example, imagine a command like this.

    class Cmd
      def execute
        data[:x] = 10
        data[:logger].debug "x is set"
      end
    end

This code will generate fixtures about 'x' and 'logger' cause it read those vars.
In many case, we don't need 'logger' object for test data, and furthermore,
the logger object would be failed in Json serialization.

In this case, we want to filter save data. Try fixtures_keys!

    Cmd.execute(:fixture_save => true, :fixture_keys => ['x'])

This will generate "stub.json" that contains only 'x'.
And, "!" can be used for negations as same as "Filter commands".

    Cmd.execute(:fixture_save => true, :fixture_keys => ['!logger'])

=== Static options

Static options(hard code) are also available.

    class Cmd
      include Ccp::Commands::Core
      stub "tmp/stub.json"
      mock "tmp/mock.json"
      # keys ["x"]
      save true

      def execute
        data[:a]
        data[:x] = 10
      end
    end

    Cmd.execute(:a=>1)

This generates "tmp/stub.json", "tmp/mock.json".

=== Test

Once you got fixtures, call "test" method to test it.

    Cmd.test
    # or
    #     Cmd.execute(:fixture_test=>true)

This automatically searchs fixtures when no fixture files are explicitly given.
This mechanism is as same as 'fixture_save'.

